#summary Going SOLO to assess novice programmers

Judy Sheard, Angela Carbone, Raymond Lister, Beth Simon, Errol Thompson, Jacqueline L. Whalley<br>
ITiCSE'08, SIGCSE Bulletin 40(3), September 2008<br>
Pages 209-213<br>
The SOLO system is a language agnostic hierarchy for categorizing student responses to questions about CS1-level code by degree of comprehension of the code. The categories are

    * Precognitive, indicating that a student has not comprehended the code whatsoever,
    * Unistructural, indicating that perhaps a line or two was understood, but a comprehensive clarity, along with any hint of purpose was missing.
    * Multistructural indicates students who understand every individual line of code but cannot compile their knowledge into a holistic understanding, and
    * Relational describes students who can look at code and uderstand its purpose and meaning.

This study altered some variables in the original application of SOLO and evaluated student's performance on a CS1 course against their SOLO evaluation at both a graduate and an undergraduate level. The authors found that there is a strong correlation between SOLO level and performance on the final exam, and also that SOLO performance stays similar per student across various problems. Thay also found that graduates tended to score higher, attributing that success to more developed cognitive ability.

This could be significant in Playing to Program in the sense that it delineates four very specific and distinct levels of understanding, each with its own unique challenges and strategies for advancement. Perhaps identifying the level of a student, (i.e. if they struggle with reading code or just with grasping a larger picture) could lead to a more informed pedagogical strategy. EF

DJW adds, they used the SOLO taxonomy to classify students' ability to read and explain code.  They suggest the way that questions that are used to measure this are worded and constructed can influence the results, but that whether or not students can see the big picture remains fairly consistent.  Their results also support the results of the [Lister09 other studies] that students who are able to see the big picture are better able to write code. 